---
title: Execute transformations
description: Define and execute local transformations
---

dlt+ provides a powerful mechanism for executing transformations on your data using a locally spun-up cache. It automatically creates and manages the cache before execution and cleans it up afterward.

A dlt+ Transformation consists of functions that modify data stored in a dlt+ Cache. These transformations can be implemented using:

* [with dbt models](./dbt-transformations.md)
* [🧪 with Python user-defined functions](./python-transformations.md)

By combining Cache and Transformations, you can efficiently process data loaded via dlt and move it to a new destination.

To use this feature, follow these steps:

1. Configure the `dlt.yml` file – Define a cache and specify transformations.
2. Generate scaffolding – Automatically create transformation templates.
3. Modify transformations – Update the generated Python functions or dbt models.
4. Run transformations – Execute them on your data.

## 1. Configure `dlt.yml` file

Before setting up the transformations in the `dlt.yml` file you need to make sure you defined the `cache`.

### Defining the cache

You can find a detailed instruction on how to define a cache in the [Cache section](../../core-concepts/cache.md). Here's an example:

```yaml
caches:
  github_events_cache:
    inputs:
      - dataset: github_events_dataset
        tables:
          items: items
    outputs:
      - dataset: github_events_dataset
        tables:
          items: items
          items_aggregated: items_aggregated
```

### Defining the transformation

Specify transformations in `dlt.yml` with the following parameters:

* Name – Unique identifier for the transformation.
* Engine – Choose between:
  * arrow for Python-based transformations
  * dbt for dbt-based transformations
* Cache – The cache that the transformation will run on.

For example,

```yaml
transformations:
  github_events_transformations:
    engine: dbt
    cache: github_events_cache
```

## Create a scaffolding

To create transformation scaffolding based on your dlt pipeline:

1. Run the dlt pipeline at least once – This ensures dlt has the dataset schema.
2. Execute the following cli command:

```bash
dlt transformation <transformation-name> render-t-layer
```

This will generate transformation files inside the ./transformations folder. Depending on the engine:

* For Python transformations: A file with transformation functions.
* For dbt transformations: dbt models.
*
Each generated file includes models for managing incremental loading states via `dlt_load_id`.

## Updated autogenerated

