
## Case study: Extending the example package with a new set of transformations and understanding what is going on

In this section, we do a short rundown of how we would go about providing a different set of transformations on the same data.

### 1. Duplicate the existing cache and transformation config

Create a new cache with the name `github_events_cache_2` but the same content as the existing `github_events_cache` cache in your dlt.yml file.

Create a new transformation with the name `github_events_transformations_2` as a copy of `github_events_transformations` in your dlt.yml file. Make sure that this new transformation references your **new** cache, not the old one. Keep the transformation type the same; you **could** choose to switch to dbt, but for this tutorial, we will stick with arrow tables.

### 2. Implement the new transformations

The dlt+ CLI provides a nice tool to scaffold your new transformations. You will need to have data in your input dataset already; otherwise, dlt will not know the schema to scaffold. Run the `render-t-layer` command on your transformation:

```sh
uv run dlt transformation github_events_transformations_2 render-t-layer
```

You will now see that in your `./transformations` folder, a new set of transformations has appeared. You will have some transformation functions that manage incremental loading state based on the dlt_load_id as well as two transformation functions that are the actual implementation of your transformations. One staging view, which pre-selects only the rows eligible for the current transformation run as well as the main output table that, for now, just forwards all incoming rows unchanged into the output table.

Please note that if you run these new transformations without applying any changes, the run will fail, as your cache expects an aggregated table that exists in the provided `github_events_transformations` but not in your new scaffolded transformations. You can either update the settings in your copied cache or implement a transformation that corresponds to the expected table.

### 3. Understanding incremental transformations

The default transformations that are generated by the scaffolding command work incrementally with the load_id from the incoming dataset. The dlt_loads table is automatically made available on the cache, and the dlt transformation layer can see which load_ids exist in the incoming dataset and select only those load_ids that are not yet reported in the `processed_load_ids` table in the transformed dataset. After all transformations have been completed, the `processed_load_ids` table is updated with all load_ids processed in the current run. The cache automatically saves the `processed_load_ids` table to the output dataset after each run. The cache will also load the `processed_load_ids` table from the output dataset when syncing the input dataset if present. This way, the incremental transformation also works on ephemeral machines where the cache is not retained between runs.
