---
title: ClickHouse
description: ClickHouse `dlt` destination
keywords: [ clickhouse, destination, data warehouse ]
---

# ClickHouse

## Install dlt with ClickHouse

**To install the DLT library with ClickHouse dependencies:**

```sh
pip install "dlt[clickhouse]"
```

## Setup Guide

### 1. Initialize the dlt project

Let's start by initializing a new `dlt` project as follows:

```sh
dlt init chess clickhouse
```

> 💡 This command will initialize your pipeline with chess as the source and ClickHouse as the destination.

The above command generates several files and directories, including `.dlt/secrets.toml` and a requirements file for ClickHouse. You can install the necessary dependencies specified in the
requirements file by executing it as follows:

```sh
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

or with `pip install "dlt[clickhouse]"`, which installs the `dlt` library and the necessary dependencies for working with ClickHouse as a destination.

### 2. Setup ClickHouse database

To load data into ClickHouse, you need to create a ClickHouse database. While we recommend asking our GPT-4 assistant for details, we have provided a general outline of the process below:

1. You can use an existing ClickHouse database or create a new one.

2. To create a new database, connect to your ClickHouse server using the `clickhouse-client` command line tool or a SQL client of your choice.

3. Run the following SQL commands to create a new database, user and grant the necessary permissions:

   ```sql
   CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS dlt;
   CREATE USER dlt IDENTIFIED WITH sha256_password BY 'Dlt*12345789234567';
   GRANT CREATE, ALTER, SELECT, DELETE, DROP, TRUNCATE, OPTIMIZE, SHOW, INSERT, dictGet ON dlt.* TO dlt;
   GRANT SELECT ON INFORMATION_SCHEMA.COLUMNS TO dlt;
   GRANT CREATE TEMPORARY TABLE, S3 ON *.* TO dlt;
   ```

### 3. Add credentials

1. Next, set up the ClickHouse credentials in the `.dlt/secrets.toml` file as shown below:

   ```toml
   [destination.clickhouse.credentials]
   database = "dlt"                         # The database name you created
   username = "dlt"                         # ClickHouse username, default is usually "default"
   password = "Dlt*12345789234567"          # ClickHouse password if any
   host = "localhost"                       # ClickHouse server host
   port = 9000                              # ClickHouse HTTP port, default is 9000
   http_port = 8443                         # HTTP Port to connect to ClickHouse server's HTTP interface. Defaults to 8443.
   secure = 1                               # Set to 1 if using HTTPS, else 0.
   dataset_table_separator = "___"          # Separator for dataset table names from dataset.
   ```

   :::info http_port
   The `http_port` parameter specifies the port number to use when connecting to the ClickHouse server's HTTP interface. This is different from default port 9000, which is used for the native TCP
   protocol.

   You must set `http_port` if you are not using external staging (i.e. you don't set the staging parameter in your pipeline). This is because dlt's built-in ClickHouse local storage staging uses the
   [clickhouse-connect](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-connect) library, which communicates with ClickHouse over HTTP.

   Make sure your ClickHouse server is configured to accept HTTP connections on the port specified by `http_port`. For example, if you set `http_port = 8443`, then ClickHouse should be listening for
   HTTP
   requests on port 8443. If you are using external staging, you can omit the `http_port` parameter, since clickhouse-connect will not be used in this case.
   :::

2. You can pass a database connection string similar to the one used by the `clickhouse-driver` library. The credentials above will look like this:

   ```toml
   # keep it at the top of your toml file, before any section starts.
   destination.clickhouse.credentials="clickhouse://dlt:Dlt*12345789234567@localhost:9000/dlt?secure=1"
   ```

## Write disposition

All [write dispositions](../../general-usage/incremental-loading#choosing-a-write-disposition) are supported.

## Data loading

Data is loaded into ClickHouse using the most efficient method depending on the data source:

- For local files, the `clickhouse-connect` library is used to directly load files into ClickHouse tables using the `INSERT` command.
- For files in remote storage like S3, Google Cloud Storage, or Azure Blob Storage, ClickHouse table functions like `s3`, `gcs` and `azureBlobStorage` are used to read the files and insert the data
  into tables.

## Datasets

`Clickhouse` does not support multiple datasets in one database, dlt relies on datasets to exist for multiple reasons.
To make `clickhouse` work with `dlt`, tables generated by `dlt` in your `clickhouse` database will have their name prefixed with the dataset name separated by
the configurable `dataset_table_separator`. Additionally, a special sentinel table that does not contain any data will be created, so dlt knows which virtual datasets already exist in a
clickhouse
destination.

## Supported file formats

- [jsonl](../file-formats/jsonl.md) is the preferred format for both direct loading and staging.
- [parquet](../file-formats/parquet.md) is supported for both direct loading and staging.

The `clickhouse` destination has a few specific deviations from the default sql destinations:

1. `Clickhouse` has an experimental `object` datatype, but we have found it to be a bit unpredictable, so the dlt clickhouse destination will load the complex datatype to a `text` column. If you need
   this feature, get in touch with our Slack community, and we will consider adding it.
2. `Clickhouse` does not support the `time` datatype. Time will be loaded to a `text` column.
3. `Clickhouse` does not support the `binary` datatype. Binary will be loaded to a `text` column. When loading from `jsonl`, this will be a base64 string, when loading from parquet this will be
   the `binary` object converted to `text`.
4. `Clickhouse` accepts adding columns to a populated table that are not null.
5. `Clickhouse` can produce rounding errors under certain conditions when using the float / double datatype. Make sure to use decimal if you cannot afford to have rounding errors. Loading the value
   12.7001 to a double column with the loader file format jsonl set will predictbly produce a rounding error for example.

## Supported column hints

ClickHouse supports the following [column hints](../../general-usage/schema#tables-and-columns):

- `primary_key` - marks the column as part of the primary key. Multiple columns can have this hint to create a composite primary key.

## Table Engine

By default, tables are created using the `ReplicatedMergeTree` table engine in ClickHouse. You can specify an alternate table engine using the `table_engine_type` with the clickhouse adapter:

```py
from dlt.destinations.adapters import clickhouse_adapter


@dlt.resource()
def my_resource():
  ...


clickhouse_adapter(my_resource, table_engine_type="merge_tree")

```

Supported values are:

- `merge_tree` - creates tables using the `MergeTree` engine
- `replicated_merge_tree` (default) - creates tables using the `ReplicatedMergeTree` engine

## Staging support

ClickHouse supports Amazon S3, Google Cloud Storage and Azure Blob Storage as file staging destinations.

`dlt` will upload Parquet or JSONL files to the staging location and use ClickHouse table functions to load the data directly from the staged files.

Please refer to the filesystem documentation to learn how to configure credentials for the staging destinations:

- [Amazon S3](./filesystem.md#aws-s3)
- [Google Cloud Storage](./filesystem.md#google-storage)
- [Azure Blob Storage](./filesystem.md#azure-blob-storage)

To run a pipeline with staging enabled:

```py
pipeline = dlt.pipeline(
  pipeline_name='chess_pipeline',
  destination='clickhouse',
  staging='filesystem',  # add this to activate staging
  dataset_name='chess_data'
)
```

### Using S3-Compatible Storage as a Staging Area

dlt supports using S3-compatible storage services, including Google Cloud Storage (GCS), as a staging area when loading data into ClickHouse.
This is handled automatically by
ClickHouse's [GCS table function](https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/sql-reference/table-functions/gcs), which dlt uses under the hood.

The ClickHouse GCS table function only supports authentication using Hash-based Message Authentication Code (HMAC) keys, which is compatible with the Amazon S3 API.
To enable this, GCS provides an S3
compatibility mode that emulates the S3 API, allowing ClickHouse to access GCS buckets via its S3 integration.

For detailed instructions on setting up S3-compatible storage with dlt, including AWS S3, MinIO, and Cloudflare R2, refer to
the [dlt documentation on filesystem destinations](https://dlthub.com/docs/dlt-ecosystem/destinations/filesystem#using-s3-compatible-storage).

To set up GCS staging with HMAC authentication in dlt:

1. Create HMAC keys for your GCS service account by following the [Google Cloud guide](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/authentication/managing-hmackeys#create).

2. Configure the HMAC keys (`aws_access_key_id` and `aws_secret_access_key`) in your dlt project's ClickHouse destination settings in `config.toml`, similar to how you would configure AWS S3
   credentials:

```toml
[destination.filesystem]
bucket_url = "s3://my_awesome_bucket"

[destination.filesystem.credentials]
aws_access_key_id = "JFJ$$*f2058024835jFffsadf"
aws_secret_access_key = "DFJdwslf2hf57)%$02jaflsedjfasoi"
project_id = "my-awesome-project"
endpoint_url = "https://storage.googleapis.com"
```

:::caution
When configuring the `bucket_url` for S3-compatible storage services like Google Cloud Storage (GCS) with ClickHouse in dlt, ensure that the URL is prepended with `s3://` instead of `gs://`. This is
because the ClickHouse GCS table function requires the use of HMAC credentials, which are compatible with the S3 API. Prepending with `s3://` allows the HMAC credentials to integrate properly with
dlt's staging mechanisms for ClickHouse.
:::

### dbt support

Integration with [dbt](../transformations/dbt/dbt.md) is generally supported via dbt-clickhouse, but not tested by us.

### Syncing of `dlt` state

This destination fully supports [dlt state sync](../../general-usage/state#syncing-state-with-destination).

<!--@@@DLT_TUBA clickhouse-->